optional reproducible build process for openenclave on linux (#3744)
openenclave/openenclave: reproducible/README.md

> ## Nix Build system for OpenEnclave SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Nix Build system for the Open Enclave SDK
```
"Open Enclave" is always 2 words

produce the same output, provable by a sha256sum.

Nix also controls visibility to build dependencies.  There is no possibilty of a covert package making its 
way into the build because all of the sources, libraries, and tools used in the process must be declared in the
build expression. 

Because all inputs are accounted for by design, auditability is built in. It is possible to reproduce the entire build
of a project, its dependent libaries and tools from source with a single command line argument.

Nix expressions are kept in a git repo, github.com/nixos/nixpkgs. In principle a single version of each package
is contained in the repo, so it is not necessary to specify package versions.  In practice these versions can be
overridden, but that comes at a cost and is not recommended unless there is no option.

The selection of packages (build outputs) in turn is defined by the branch and fork of the nix repo clone which
you are using.

Since the build outputs are measured, producing globally unique names, built versions can be cached. By default, 
there is a global cache at https://cache.nixos.org which contains cached built derivations for the officially 

> released packages.  It is not necessary to use this cache. The cache protocol is simple http get/put protocol, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
released packages.  It is not necessary to use this cache. The cache protocol is a simple HTTP get/put protocol, so
```

any url that points to the correct heirarchy can be used. If no prebuilt version of a package is available at
the cache, the package will be built. Since the package has a fixed output, there is no difference in output

> using the cached version or one custom built.. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the cached version or one custom built.
```

#### Language:

Nix is a language which looks much like Haskell. It is a Haskell derivitive in the same sense that
Java is a C++ derivitive, which is to say it carries over syntactic conventions but not strictly or
completely, and adds some features not in Haskell.

The basis for the language is the function.  A function is an expression which returns a value, the value can

> be a singleton (for example integer), set (indicated by braces), or list (indicated by brackets []). Functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be a singleton (for example integer), set (indicated by curly braces {}), or list (indicated by brackets []). Functions
```

may include functions. They must be declared in the "let" section of the declaration.  Functions are called only 
when referenced and reduced to values.

When you see what appears to be regular code with braces and a series of semicolon separators is actually a set
being used as an argument.

There are no variables, just functions returning contants. Datatypes are a property of values, but once declared

> the function has a constant datatype. function results can be transformed but there is no casting as such. The let
> clause is where a number of functions can be declared. The in clause is where they are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the function has a constant datatype. function results can be transformed but there is no casting as such. The "let"
clause is where a number of functions can be declared. The "in" clause is where they are used.
```

```
let
    # function returning an integer:
    three = 3;
    # function returning a set. Set members are retrieved through the dot operator, so myset."one":
    myset = { one = 1; two = 2; three = 3; }
    #
    mylist = [ "one", "two", "three" ];
in 
     
```

> if then else exists, but the form is similar to the C conditional,  if <cond> then <alt1> else <alt2> where cond,
> alt1 and alt2 are all function calls.  if returns a value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"if then else exists", but the form is similar to the C conditional,  `if <cond> then <alt1> else <alt2>` where `cond`,
`alt1` and `alt2` are all function calls.  "if" returns a value.
```

```
    arch = if platform ? arch then platform.arch else "x86_64-linux"
```
  
There is no sequencing as such. Functions are composed through expression evaluation, so the expression:
```
    this that the_other 
```
will execute the function "the_other" and return its value as an argument to "that" which in turn returns its value to

> "this".  There are various caching facilities, so its possible that one or mor e of those arguments will be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"this".  There are various caching facilities, so it's possible that one or more of those arguments will be 
```

the "print" will actually be evaluated.  

There are no loops in nix. The functionality of the loop is replaced by the map function. 

### Nix data flow.

The nix building process starts out with a nix expression. The expression is located in a file which is 
specified to the nix-instantiate tool, or on the command line. The instantiation process binds the 
dependencies specified by the expression (in buildInputs or checkInputs) to the concrete resources offered by
the nix repo, which specifies the universe of packages available, calculates a sha256 signature for the built product, 
then places the concretised expression into the nix store as a derivation.

```
nix-instantiate -I/home/azureuser/ default.nix
```

A trivial example of a nix expression:
```
with (import <nixpkgs>) {};

let
  # Use the let-in clause to assign the derivation to a variable
  myScript = pkgs.writeShellScriptBin "helloWorld" "echo Hello World";
in
stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  name = "test-environment";

  src = ./.;
  # Add the derivation to the PATH
  buildInputs = [ myScript ];

  installPhase =
  ''
       mkdir $out
       cp -r ${myScript} $out/
  '';
}
```
  

> In the above, let is the initialisation/declaration part of the expression. The actual expression proper begins after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above, "let" is the initialisation/declaration part of the expression. The actual expression proper begins after
```

- The package repository for a linux distro "NixOS" which will eventully be a standalone distro. In that 
  case packages are chosen for release branches with an eye to mutual compatibility and working well within
  that defined universe.  

- The package repository is also used for producing packages for other linux distros (ubuntu, debian,
  redhat, fedora, arch, gentoo) with easily auditable dependencies. In this case, it is necessary to
  consider specific compatible versions of packages.  In particular, glibc must be an equal or older
  revision than the glibc of the platform or the program will not dynamically link.  This is by design.
  Ubuntu 18.04 is limited to glibc 2.27. The current lts release 20.04 usues glibc 2.31 and fedora 33 
  uses libc-2.32.  The nixpkgs branch release-20.09 is based on glibc 2.32.  The somewhat older branch
  20.03 uses libc-2.30 so can work on the current common distros, including the current rhel.  

  While it is not difficult to change the version of glibc in a custom repo branch, since glibc is linked 
  by every package, to do so would require a custom repo build. In that case, it would require a custom 

>   cache to provide prebuilding, or everything would require everything be built from source..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cache to provide prebuilding, or everything would require everything be built from source.
```

### Caching and Hydra

The official branches in nixpkgs are prebuilt and available at cache.nixos.org. Caching is keyed to the build outputs
sha digest, so custom environments will be able to use those prebuilts so long as no changes have been made. 
If any changes are made to that package, any package related to the changed package will need to be custom

> built and cached in nix store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built and cached in the nix store.
```

> ## A Nix build system for OpenEnclave SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A Nix build system for the Open Enclave SDK
```

> We propose to add an optional nix based build environment for OpenEnclave SDK using docker containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to add an optional nix based build environment for the Open Enclave SDK using docker containers.
```
Will this work for Windows builds too?

This would consist of :

> - Dockerfile.nix and build-oe-nix-build.sh for building the oe nix docker image locally.

Reviewer 2: I get `libsgx_enclave_common.so: no such file or directory` upon running `build-oe-nix-image.sh`:

```bash
$ sudo ./build-oe-nix-image.sh
...
...
+ nix-instantiate -I. -E '(import <nixpkgs> {}).dpkg'
warning: you did not specify '--add-root'; the result might be removed by the garbage collector
/nix/store/dfdvxn42glnb9xgy8yrkd70gjnvhx6y0-dpkg-1.19.7.drv
+ nix-env -I. -i /nix/store/dfdvxn42glnb9xgy8yrkd70gjnvhx6y0-dpkg-1.19.7.drv
installing 'dpkg-1.19.7.drv'
these paths will be fetched (9.35 MiB download, 58.04 MiB unpacked):
  /nix/store/sg42gk32rbx5b3klmw9ql2sy165rnq8v-perl-5.30.1
  /nix/store/xic28d0cmcxv08wmh539xqq09vnajdar-dpkg-1.19.7
copying path '/nix/store/sg42gk32rbx5b3klmw9ql2sy165rnq8v-perl-5.30.1' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/xic28d0cmcxv08wmh539xqq09vnajdar-dpkg-1.19.7' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
building '/nix/store/9lc3laqsk26d3c95d38l2cfb716npa2j-user-environment.drv'...
created 742 symlinks in user environment
+ nix-env -I. -i /nix/store/6a6ilqysgz1gwfs0ahriw94q35vj84sy-vim-8.2.1123
installing 'vim-8.2.1123'
warning: unable to download 'https://cache.nixos.org/6a6ilqysgz1gwfs0ahriw94q35vj84sy.narinfo': Couldn't resolve host name (6); retrying in 260 ms
these paths will be fetched (14.82 MiB download, 70.98 MiB unpacked):
  /nix/store/0hcbvd7wpsx0p4vjvn5b2jb04rf35mkc-gawk-5.1.0
  /nix/store/2pi6zgkwnr3zdslvlv16nixpzvbyjx1n-glibc-2.31
  /nix/store/6a6ilqysgz1gwfs0ahriw94q35vj84sy-vim-8.2.1123
  /nix/store/j206pskg2yzyla1cnfrb9kb5n5bfvjgm-bash-4.4-p23
  /nix/store/mphihm7gn8yb1svf8zgyn9qvl86zhy6m-ncurses-6.2
  /nix/store/y7ya11l8qy5z2zyhc8db7km7kykkl1sw-libunistring-0.9.10
  /nix/store/zzp30ib8rgm42d80gw3jl5cy5vgvaq9y-libidn2-2.3.0
copying path '/nix/store/y7ya11l8qy5z2zyhc8db7km7kykkl1sw-libunistring-0.9.10' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/zzp30ib8rgm42d80gw3jl5cy5vgvaq9y-libidn2-2.3.0' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/2pi6zgkwnr3zdslvlv16nixpzvbyjx1n-glibc-2.31' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/j206pskg2yzyla1cnfrb9kb5n5bfvjgm-bash-4.4-p23' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/0hcbvd7wpsx0p4vjvn5b2jb04rf35mkc-gawk-5.1.0' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/mphihm7gn8yb1svf8zgyn9qvl86zhy6m-ncurses-6.2' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
copying path '/nix/store/6a6ilqysgz1gwfs0ahriw94q35vj84sy-vim-8.2.1123' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...
building '/nix/store/j7icczmyfwb65nh6a0l7zha9j68dfysc-user-environment.drv'...
created 782 symlinks in user environment
+ nix-store -I. --verify --check-contents
error: no arguments expected
Try 'nix-store --help' for more information.
+ set +x
Removing intermediate container 482622a5e9af
 ---> de39efe358c0
Step 29/38 : ADD ./sort_deb_sum.sh /home/$BUILD_USER
 ---> 20b6a44fa5f3
Step 30/38 : ADD ./nix-build.sh /home/$BUILD_USER
 ---> e7a6fb1f6d1e
Step 31/38 : ADD ./nix-shell.sh /home/$BUILD_USER
 ---> c640511c64ac
Step 32/38 : ADD ./build_deb_pkg.sh /home/$BUILD_USER
 ---> 6c457a9e8e6a
Step 33/38 : RUN mkdir -p /home/$BUILD_USER/.nix_libs
 ---> Running in f84b6e911dc9
Removing intermediate container f84b6e911dc9
 ---> 86b48a4e1e37
Step 34/38 : ADD ./nix-libs/libsgx_enclave_common.so /home/$BUILD_USER/.nix_libs
ADD failed: stat /var/lib/docker/tmp/docker-builder901887648/nix-libs/libsgx_enclave_common.so: no such file or directory
...

```

Author: Investigating. I wonder if git has an issue with binaries

Reviewer 3: Can we avoid checking in binaries?

Author: Just in case I'll put them into a tar file and copy from there.

Reviewer 3: Ideally, we should host the tar file somewhere else (i.e., azure storage) and just use a script to download it.

Reviewer 4: Is libsgx_enclave_common.so still needed to build the OE SDK binaries? Run time dependency on Intel SGX PSW components makes sense. Why do we have build time dependency?

Reviewer 2: We don't need libsgx-enclave-common.so or any other sgx libraries to build the SDK.

Author: Not to build the sdk, but to run ctests.

Author: It would be good not to restrict visibility for now.  Its easy to retarget later.

Author: FWIW, if I have the tar file in the docker build directory, docker unpacks the contents. If I get it from https:// or whatever, I have to do it. Not an issue, the main question is where to find a CDN that is both open to everybody and secure.

Reviewer 5: @anakrish @bodzhang responding to you both above. I am wondering what the testing strategy here is. I do have some thoughts. The package itself once built in the Nix environment could be exported and installed on the host and then verified with the sample installation. The alternative would be to build in nix, run in nix (ctest) and then export. The problem I foresee with the later methodology however is that the psw/dcap libs could be out of date, and if they are, attestation will not work due to not being able to generate a valid quote. 

What are your thoughts on a valid testing strategy, this can be brought up with SIG-Testing if we want to dig into it a little more offline but the concerns stem from a CI and Release standpoint as that is the end result here.

Reviewer 4: @BRMcLaren , I also prefer to see the NIX build process limited to the build itself, and the ctest can be run on the build output. In fact, I wonder whether it's just luck that only a handful of the Intel PSW/DCAP .so files need to be included to run the current ctest. I would assume many other files are required to run any test that involves SGX attestation flow.

Reviewer 5: @bodzhang I think we should be specific in 'build output' here, I believe we are both talking about the .deb produced, is something like this what you are imagining?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/54328827/99863328-94482200-2b52-11eb-89fc-57d62261889c.png)

Reviewer 4: @BRMcLaren , based on this [comment](https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/pull/3744#discussion_r527970744), ctest runs before the .deb is produced. So If the intermediate "build output" can be used to run ctest outside the container, the test requirement is met. Of course, changing the build-ctest process a bit to output .deb and then run ctest works too.

Reviewer 5: @bodzhang [currently](https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/blob/master/.jenkins/pipelines/Azure/Linux/Jenkinsfile#L144-L168) is what we do. Build - > Test - > Package - > Test.

Awhile back we did just Build - > Test but ended up running into packaging issues, since then we always have stuck with the model of testing the package as well. Considering the end product of this is to have a highly auditable package it might be best to also do "changing the build-ctest process a bit to output .deb and then run ctest works too." up front.

Author: The Ctests are based on the cmake heirarchy, which in turn is oriented to the nix store paths.  I'm unaware of any process we have in place that can get around that.   Do we have a system for just installing the deb and running the unit tests on it?

Author: I've tried prototyping dumping the nix/store closure and reloading in another container with a similar nix store. That was able to run ctests directly. If the modle is we do the build, build the package then run ctests elsewhere, we can do that.

Author: To be clear, are we saying that this is fundamentally a parallel process, therefore we can take the success of the unit tests  for granted, build the deb, then sanity check by building/running the samples?

We can do either. We can build/ctest at once, or build then dump the nix/store closure, then run another container and ctest.  In all cases we can and should sanity check the deb by installing into a container and validating, which infrastructure I believe already exists

In all cases we should dump the closure for the sake of anyone who wants to stay in nix world to build their downstream project.

Author: So, you can't run ctest without the rest of the nix-store when you build in nix land, but you can export the closure (the build output plus any references made from the build output) then import it into a new instance of the container. I have done that, so not you build in one container and can test in the other.

A side effect of this is that it is possible to use the closure for openenclave-sdk to build additional downstream projects using the sdk. I will be adding that in a little bit.

- build_openenclave.sh for building the oe deb package via a nix environment.
- Dockerfile.test and test-oe-nix-build.sh for verifying that package is functional.

The process builds a reproducible .deb package of openenclave-sdk. 

> This process can be integrated with ADO or CPDX CI, but that is not part of this submission. We do not currently

Reviewer 5: CDPx is a Microsoft thing, a better phrasing would be that it can be integrated with all CI build engines that support containers.

Author: Done.

recommend depending exclusively on a nix environment for production packaging and CI.

### Dockerfile.nix

The dockerfile is passed up to four build args:

 - BASE_IMAGE allows for different os base images, in particular it allows the substitution of a
   CPDX base image rather than the generic ubuntu 20.04. As was previously mentioned, we are basing on 
   ubuntu 20.04 because package versions align best with nixpkgs release-20.03.

 - BUILD_USER, BUILD_USER_ID, BUILD_USER_HOME need to be set together.
   Reproducibility requires a standard build user, since the tar directory entries in the deb package include 
   user and group information.  We default to "azureuser" "1000" "/home/azureuser"

The script "build-oe-nix-image.sh" is a thin wrapper. It takes no arguments, and just passes the needed arguments
to docker build.  If it needs to be modified, a new script should be created.

Dockerfile.nix prepares the build image by:

- adding via apt minimum packages for the outer image. This includes a text editor (vim) and ELF patch utility (patchelf).

> - sets up nit configuration.

Reviewer: Should "nit" be "nix"?

- adds a build.env file which contains environment values to control the build.  This is not part of the 
  - REV is the git revision (commit or tag) to pull for the build.
  - SHA is the sha256 hash of the tar file downloaded from git.
  - DO_CHECK enables ctests as part of the build.
  - DEB_SHA specifies the expected result sha25sum for the .deb file produced. An error will be thrown if the 
    sha is incorrect. If not set, the sha is not checked.

- adds needed files for ctest to the .nix_libs directory, which will be referred to by ctest. Nix expressions
  cannot refer to libraries outside the minimum environment and explicit inputs, so these libraries are needed
  to use sgx (and eventually TrustZone) facilties.

- sets the build user as the user. Among other things, this means the build image when run cannot be 
  modified by the addition of apt packages.

The resulting image is named openenclave-build. It can (and should) be generated once and pushed into a common 
repo.

### build_openenclave.sh

Runs the image produced by docker build, with arguments resolved.
The output of the process is a .deb and a .nar file containing an exported nix store for use in developing 

> openenclave sdk apps using nix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Enclave SDK apps using nix.
```

> ### workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Workflow
```

```
   ./build-oe-nix-image.sh
```
will build the nix docker image. This can be pushed:
```
   docker push openenclave-build
```
and later pulled, or just used locally.

> To build the openenclave sdk 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the Open Enclave SDK
```

```

>    ./build_openenclave.sh -o ./result

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   ./build_openenclave.sh -o result
```
As the output directory is being used as a docker volume mount, the leading `.` would cause docker to freak out.

Seeing error similar to -
```
$ docker run -it -v ./result:/tmp/ hello-world
docker: Error response from daemon: create ./result: "./result" includes invalid characters for a local volume name, only "[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9_.-]" are allowed. If you intended to pass a host directory, use absolute path.
```

Author: Confirmed. Fix in a minute. I've been using ~/result without trouble, but that appears to be an absolute path.

Author: fixed. Thank you.

```

> will build the oe deb and nix-store and place it in ./result. By default it will run ctests. If the

Reviewer 6: At the end of the build, couldn't find the debian package in `./result` on the host or in `/output` in the container. 
The debian package is created under the nix-store in the container, but probably isn't copied to `/output` ?

```
azureuser@62548e384ec9:~$ find / -type f -name "open-enclave_0.12.0_amd64.deb" 
/nix/store/0kjcfn87x6ai26nk8s7scq8wc5mqikcg-openenclave-sdk/open-enclave_0.12.0_amd64.deb
/nix/store/0kjcfn87x6ai26nk8s7scq8wc5mqikcg-openenclave-sdk/_CPack_Packages/Linux/DEB/open-enclave_0.12.0_amd64.deb
```

Reviewer 4: @yakman2020, can you clarify the expectation on the location of the Debian package?

Author: The package goes into /output in the container, or the directory specified by -o on the host.

Author: brcamp@nixbed:~/Projects/openenclave/reproducible$ ls ~/results 
build  open-enclave_0.12.0_amd64.deb

Author: Try 
```
git reset --hard HEAD~1
git pull
```

I've been force pushing into the PR commit.

Author: And , by the way, thank you for your feedback.

Author: changed to ~/result which is an absolute path. Relative paths are not allowed.

sha of the resulting package is specified, it will compare the .deb sha25sum to the specified value.
At the end of the process the deb package will not contain any run time evidence of coming from 
a nix environment. 

Make sure your user is either in sudoers or the destination directory exists or you will
be asked for a password.

It is possible to manually execute nix-build within the container, in order to debug build problems.
```

> ./build_openenclave.sh -o ./result -i

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
./build_openenclave.sh -o result -i
```
Same as above.

Author: fixed
